Implementation of a Virtual Reality Operating 
Room for Simulation Purposes in Medical Training

Abdeljalil Azar

Medical Simulation Center of the 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation (CSMFCZ) 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation 
Rabat, Morocco 
abdeljelilazar123@gmail.com

Zineb Farahat

Medical Simulation Center of the 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation (CSMFCZ) 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation 
Rabat, Morocco 
farahatzineb@gmail.com

Oumama Benslimane 
Medical Simulation Center of the 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation (CSMFCZ) 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation 
Rabat, Morocco 
oumamabenslimane@yahoo.fr

Nabil Ngote

Abulcasis International University of 
Health Sciences (UIASS)

Rabat, Morocco 
ngotenabil@gmail.com

Jamal Samir 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation 
Rabat, Morocco 
ssamirj amal@yahoo. fr

Kawtar Megdiche

Medical Simulation Center of the 
Cheikh Zaid Foundation (CSMFCZ)

Cheikh Zaid Foundation 
Rabat, Morocco

megdiche.kawtar@gmail.com

Abstract¡X As a technology allowing an immersion in a 
digitally created artificial world, virtual reality has 
increasingly replaced experiments on real-world objects. Thus, 
the implementation of a virtual reality solution can be very 
beneficial in education and scientific research fields. Medical 
simulation fits perfectly into this dynamic of integrating digital 
tools in the health sciences teaching. Therefore, the Cheikh 
Zaid Foundation's Medical Simulation Center (CSMFCZ), has 
focused on educational innovation by developing its own 3D 
environment. This paper deals with the particular case of an 
operating room, allowing simulation of different surgical 
scenarios in order to enrich the digital platform of the 
CSMFCZ.

Keywords¡XVirtual Reality, Autocad, Archicad, Medical 
Simulation, 3D environment, Blender

I. Introduction

Simulation can be defined as a technique to replace a real 
system with a model to study its behavior [1]. Several 
reasons justify the use of a system model to be studied 
instead of the system itself: either the actual system is 
inaccessible to direct observation, or the latter cost or the 
system characteristics prohibit experimental use, in particular 
because of possible risks to humans [2] .It is therefore an 
essential tool for the training of risky professions, which 
makes it possible to reproduce the most diverse situations 
and to learn technical gestures without taking any real risks 
nor make any mistakes.

Simulation can be applied to several disciplines such as 
aeronautics, nuclear, shipping, armed forces and health. In 
the specific case of health, Simulation corresponds to "the 
use of a material (such as a manikin or a procedural 
simulator), Virtual Reality or a standardized patient to 
reproduce situations or care environments to teach diagnostic 
and therapeutic procedures, and to repeat processes, medical 
concepts or decision-making by a health professional or team 
of professionals."[3]

Simulation¡¦s use is of real educational interest because it 
allows the acquisition of theoretical, technical and nontechnical 
knowledge in a sustainable way, while ensuring the 
safety and comfort of patients [2].

Thus, in 1759, one of the first mannequins used for 
teaching was born: It is Angelique du Coudray¡¦s delivery

mannequin created in 1759, which allowed to train many 
midwives and doctors [4].

But the real upsurge of modern simulation began only in 
the 1960s. The first models developed by Laerdal, a 
Norwegian toy manufacturer, trained health care workers and 
the general public in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, chest 
compressions and mouth-to-mouth. The manikin developed 
by Dr. Harvey in 1968 was the first model to use the modern 
concept of task simulator such as blood pressure and cardiac 
auscultation to identify cardiac conditions [5] [6].

At the same time, Doctors Stephen Abrahamson and 
Judson Denson developed the first computer-controlled 
manikin, the Sim One [7].

In 1987, Dr. David Gaba adapted computer software used 
in everyday practice, mannequins and routine equipment to 
create the first mock operating room, initially dedicated to 
Continuing Medical Education and then to Initial Medical 
Training in 1992 [5] [6].

Since the late 1990s, and thanks to the development of 
computer and videogames, the supply of training in medical 
simulation has continued to grow with the appearance 
including task simulators and the creation of virtual 
environments [8].

Today, a plethora of techniques in simulation exist, some 
allow the acquisition of basic knowledge or high-level 
knowledge, and others focus on the transmission of knowhow.


Reference [9] distinguishes between several levels of 
simulation ranging from Low-Fidelity to High-Fidelity, 
depending on the complexity of the equipment used and the 
possible interaction of the trainers with the participant.

Among these High-Fidelity techniques, Virtual Reality is 
a technique based on the use of a set of devices that can 
digitally simulate an environment. According to the 
technologies used, it allows the user to feel a virtual universe 
through its different senses: the sight (the mostofen), the 
touch, the hearing and/or the smell [10], by using a Virtual 
Reality headset.

The first Virtual Reality headsets appeared in the late 
1950s in cinema, then in the early 1970s, they were used in

978-1-7281-4341 -5/20/$31.00 c2020 IEEE


flight simulators and finally, from the late 1990s in games 
[11].

In the 2010s, other sectors have begun to benefit from 
this technology, such as education and training, particularly 
in health sciences [11] [12] [13].

Indeed, in the medical field, users are very impressed 
with the Virtual Reality experience, since this technology 
improves traditional teaching methods. Indeed, medical care 
training using Virtual Reality allows users to interact as if 
they were immersed in the real scene [14] [15]. In this way, 
Virtual Reality can reduce the risk of technical errors in 
health care due to negligence. In addition, using Virtual 
Reality to build virtual organs or tissues can help doctors in 
their work, enable doctors and nurses to communicate more 
effectively with their patients, improve doctors' ability to 
diagnose patients, provide information about their disease 
and the progress of surgery [16]. Furthermore, this 
technology has the advantage of being relatively inexpensive 
and non-invasive. Finally, Virtual Reality training in the 
treatment of disease and technical training will not pose any 
real risk to the patient [17].

It is in this particular context that the Cheikh Zaid 
Foundation¡¦s Medical Simulation Center examined the 
opportunity of integrating Virtual Reality into the medical 
simulation curriculum. Indeed, by integrating Virtual Reality 
in the world of medical simulation [18], the latter will allow 
a high level of practice and benefit future doctors and 
medical executives.

This paper presents an implementation solution of an 
operating room as a Virtual Reality unit. The choice was on 
the operating room for the following reasons:

¡E When students attend a procedure, they can distract 
surgical teams focused on a complex task

¡E Operating rooms are sometimes too small to 
accommodate students who need to attend procedures to 
learn.

¡E The risk of infection for patients is much greater 
when additional students are present in the operating room.

The first phase of this project consists in the creation of a 
2D plan, integrating the plan measurements according to the 
required standards as well as the equipment, the instruments 
and the technical installations of the operating room, then the 
modeling of this environment in 3D. The second phase will 
be dedicated to programming including creation of a 
scenario, choice of a dialogue system, programming of 
gestures and objects and finally interaction in real time.

The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section II 
depicts materials and methods. Section III is devoted to the 
results and discussion. Finally, conclusions are mentioned in 
Section IV.

II. Tools and Methods

A. Environmental diagram

First of all, a 2D plan is created using the AUToCAD 
software. The choice of this software was based on the fact 
that it can be used as an architectural planning tool since it 
comes with a user-interface with built-in design lay-outs. The 
lay-outs contain numerous templates specially designed for 
architectural planning and building construction. Moreover 
its analytical tools can analyse the components of the 
building to troubleshoot stress and load levels of building 
supports. Furthermore, this software enables architects to 
design, plan, execute and analyse the strength of a building, 
at design stage level and in different fields such as 
medecine. AutoCAD can also be used either as an 
engineering drafting tool to draw accurate 2D drawings for 
any engineering domain and to render to 3D models to help 
in visualization of the end product ; or as a graphic design 
tool to enable users to plan and map out spaces and take 
advantage of the space available [19]. It can be used 
simultaneously with 3D Max and various other application 
softwares including animation tools. This step consists of 
integrating the measures of the plan according to the 
standards required for the creation of an operating theater. 
Then, the equipments, instruments and technical installations 
must be integrated in order to obtain a primary design plan. 
The environment modeling is done through the 2D plan 
using the ARCHICAD software.

The implementation of the 2D plan in 3D modeling is 
done by a software. This software enable creating the desired 
environment in 3D using an integrated library which contains 
the various elements in need (For example: walls, floor, 
ceilings ... etc.). Once the environment is composed, the 
equipment, objects and instruments are modeled necessary in 
3D in order to infuse them in the environment using the 3DS 
MAX software. This software supports a huge number of 
tools that are easily available for modeling, it is user-friendly 
in modeling and complex animation, and does not only 
support powerful and multiple tools for animation but also 
the Material Editor that allows the user to create and edit 
materials and maps in their scenes [20].

The 3DS Max software will not be used directly by the 
Medical Simulation Center¡¦s professors, but it will only be 
used for the 3D environment creation.

The followed approach is presented by the algorithm of 
Fig. 1.


III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. First stage: Autocad Software

It is at this level that the essential characteristics of the 
operating theater can be identified, such as: Dimensions, 
structures, required installations, locations of equipment, etc. 
It should be noted that the stages of modeling depend on 
each others, this is why the specification of what the 
operating room must contain, must be done from the start 
whether on the technical aspect (measurements, plans, etc.) 
or functional aspect (equipment, installations, etc.)

To make a 2D plan, the integrate of a nomenclature is 
important to make the plan more readable and 
understandable. And since this work consists of a light plan 
which does not require a lot of nomenclature, a color code 
was used for each of the components: red for the doors, 
green for polyvinylchloride and blue for exhaust air, as 
seeing in Fig. 2. in order to ensure an easy understanding of 
the plan.

Fig. 2. The 2D environment

The installation of the equipments furnishing the 
operating room as shown in Fig. 3. (Operative lighting, 
operating table, surgeon arm, electrosurgical unit, anesthesia 
breathing machine, monitors, resuscitation breathers, 
defibrillator, endoscope, aspirator, surgical instruments, 
mayo table, instruments table, emergency cart, waste bins, 
medical counter [21], mobile chair with backrest, medical 
fluids, negatoscopes.) must first be created in 2D. This 
allows to precise positioning of each object relative to the 
surface of the space. 2D modeling of objects, equipment, and 
the lighting required in the operating room is done after 
modeling the environment to facilitate installation of the 3D 
plan.

Fig. 1.Flowchart of the environmental diagram realization


B. Second stage: Archicad Software

Two-dimensional (2D) drawing has several limitations; it 
does not allow defining complex surfaces and volumes. 
Since the main objective is to obtain an operating theater in 
3D, Using the previous 2D plan, the walls, doors and floor 
can be diagramed in 3D [22].

The elimination of right angles is done by modeling 
crossed walls as seeing in Fig. 4. This provides complete 
modeling of the operating room.

C. Third stage: 3ds Max Software

This modeling consists in integrating the 3D 
environment; that had been modeled in the previous step, 
using the software interface. The latter is the tool used to 
model instruments, objects..., in 3D. The modeling of 
objects and equipment is carried out using real photos of 
medical equipments and software, they are then integrated 
into the environment. As shown in Fig. 6.

Fig.6. 3D object modeling

Fig.3.Inserted objects

Fig. 4.3D modeling

At this level, 3D environment can be considered as 
completed as seeing in Fig. 5. The figures illustrate a front- 
top-left view of the full version of operating theater. Note 
that so far only the 3D sketch of the operating room was 
created. This will be used to set up the equipments to have a 
well-functioning environment.

The figure illustrate the final version of the operating 
room in 3D as shown in Fig. 7. These are seen from the front 
which allows the user to differentiate and visualize each 
medical device individually. The equipment must be 
positioned in a structured way that makes the operating room 
a functional space that enable the user doing an immersion 
close to reality [23]. This version can be modified according 
to the equipments and material that the user need [24], the 
ultimate goal being to make this room an environment that 
meets the educational needs of the user.

Fig.7. The 3D operating room

Fig. 5. The 3D environment


D. Fourth Stage : Unity Software

The Unity software is used to develop and build a virtual 
reality solution using the plugins and packages that are 
already integrated in the software. The importation of the 3D 
environment, which was created in the previous step, is done 
by using an import/export function that allows users to 
integrate this environment into the UNITY work window. 
The virtual headset will connected to the software using the 
"STEAMVR Asset".

a) Human hands programming:

In order to allow an easy interaction with the objects and 
the different gestures and programmed actions, the more 
practical way is to integrate a model of human hands 
replacing the control levers although their color. In this case, 
the white color has been chosen to represent the medical 
gloves, as shown in Fig. 8.

c) Teleportation:

Finally, the teleportation allows to move around in space 
in case the drawn area of the helmet is insufficient. 
Teleportation is then used to change the view and positioning 
without having to move in real life, as shown in Fig. 10.

Fig. 8. Programming the hands

b) Command programming:

The first programmed command is the one that enable 
users to take in their hands and let go of the different objects 
in the environment, such as syringes, scissors, tweezers, etc. 
as shown in Fig. 9. It is very important to program this 
command first, because it is the most used in this case 
because we want to present an operating room.

Fig. 10. The Teleportation

IV. CONCLUSIONS

The present paper depicted with the implementation of a 
3D modelisation of an operating room, which is certainly 
very useful for medical simulation training. The presented 
solutions are of great use in the medical field, more 
specifically in surgery. They are all intended to help learners 
practice, improve their knowledge through practical activity 
sessions in a virtual environment. Interesting prospects are 
envisaged. The system can be more cooperative with the 
integration of a virtual reality multiplayer mode. 
Another perspective would be to make the solution 
customizable to allow health professionals and teachers to 
share their knowledge in the medical sector. 
Furthermore this will enable them to set up their own 
experiences in different hospital departments.

The two approaches 2D and 3D (and more precisely that 
of 3D) gave a vision in advance of what the virtual 
environment is going to look like. The combination of these 
two approaches with the VR approach, which are projected 
one on the other, enables to present these results and this 
achievement. Virtual reality is a complex aspect that brings 
together several approaches leading to a single result that 
itself offers several options to make an environment adapted 
to the wishes and expectations. It has many advantages for 
the learning of certain techniques, and offers new solutions 
to the whole simulation problems of command/control and 
communication. It is an improvement of traditional 
simulation techniques.

Fig. 9. Command Programming


References

[1] M. A. Centeno, ¡§An Introduction to Simulation Modeling,¡¨ in 
Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 15-22, 
December 1996.

[2] R. Amalberti, ¡§Gestion des risques et facteurs humains - Role de la 
simulation,¡¨ in La simulation en sante de la theorie a la pratique, 
Springer, Paris, 2013, pp.3-14.

[3] J.C. Granry and M.C. Moll, Rapport de mission Etat de l¡¦art (national 
et international) en matiere de pratiques de simulation dans le 
domaine de la sante, January 2012.

[4] M.E. Moran, ¡§Enlightenment via simulation:¡§crone-ology's¡¨ first 
woman,¡¨ Journal of Endourology, vol. 24(1), pp. 5-8, January 2010.

[5] K.R. Rosen, ¡§The history of medical simulation,¡¨ Journal of of 
Critical Care, vol. 23(2), pp. 157-166,June 2008.

[6] J.B. Cooper and V.R. Taqueti, ¡§A brief history of the development 
of mannequin simulators for clinical education and training,¡¨ 
Postgraduate medical journal, vol. 84, pp. 563-570,December 2008.

[7] S. Abrahamson, J.S. Denson and R.M. Wolf, ¡§Effectiveness of a 
simulator in training anesthesiology residents,¡¨ British Medecine 
Journal Quality & Safety, vol. 13, pp. 395-399, October 2004.

[8] G. Riva, ¡§Applications of Virtual Environments in Medicine,¡¨ 
Methods of Information in Medicine, vol. 42(5), pp. 524-534, 
February 2003.

[9] G. Alinier, ¡§A typology of educationally focused medical simulation 
tools,¡¨ Medical teacher, vol. 29(8), pp. 243-250, November 2007.

[10] P. Fuchs, Les interfaces de la realite virtuelle. Les Presses de l'Ecole 
des Mines de Paris, 1996.

[11] C. Anthes, R. Garcia Hernandez, M. Wiedemann and D. 
Kranzlmuller, ¡§State of the Art of Virtual Reality Technologies,¡¨ 
IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 2016 [2016 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, At Big Sky, Montana, United States].

[12] N. Mohamudally, State of the Art Virtual Reality and Augmented 
Reality Knowhow, ISBN: 978-1-78923-163-2, 2018.

[13] R. Giuseppe, B.K. Wiederhold,F. Mantovani, Neuroscience of Virtual 
Reality: From Virtual Exposure to Embodied Medicine,January 2019, 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 22(1):82-96, 
DOI: 10.1089/cyber.2017.29099.gri.

[14] M.C. Hsieh, Y.H. Lin, ¡§VR and AR Applications in Medical Practice 
and Education,¡¨ The journal of nursing, vol. 64(6), pp. 12 - 18, 
December 2017.

[15] G.S. Ruthenbeck, K.J. Reynolds, ¡§Virtual reality for medical training: 
The state-of-the-art,¡¨ Journal of Simulation, vol. 9(1), pp. 16 - 26, 
2015.

[16] T. Ikonen, T. Antikainen, M. Silvennoinen, J. Isojarvi, E. Makinen 
and T. Scheinin, ¡§Virtual reality simulator training of laparoscopic 
cholecystectomies - A systematic review,¡¨ Scandinavian Journal of 
Surgery, vol. 101(1), pp. 5 - 12, 2012.

[17] C. Moro, Z. Stromberga, A. Raikos, A. Stirling, ¡§The effectiveness of 
virtual and augmented reality in health sciences and medical 
anatomy,¡¨ Anatomical Sciences Education, vol. 10(6), pp. 549 - 559, 
November 2017.

[18] I.Raiche, Simulation par modeles et realite virtuelle des gestes 
techniques. In: Boet S., Savoldelli G., Granry JC. (eds) La simulation 
en sante De la theorie a la pratique. Springer, (2013) Paris.

[19] V. M. Jayathilakel, A. B. Shantha, ¡§Comparative Study Of Cad 
Software Use For Architectural Designs,¡¨ International Research 
Symposium on Engineering Advancements 2015 (RSEA 2015) 
SAiTm, Malabe, Sri Lanka

[20] Iftikhar B. Abbasov, ¡§Fundamentals of 3D modeling in the graphics 
system 3ds Max,¡¨ 2018: Training Manual. _ 2017. 141p, publisher: 
DMK PressISBN: 978-5-97060-516-5 March 2017.

[21] R. Giuseppe, B.K. Wiederhold, A.A. Gaggioli, ¡§Brain and Virtual 
Reality: What Do they Have in Common and How to Exploit their 
Potential,¡¨ Annual Review of Cyber Therapy and Telemedicine,April 
2019

[22] M. Beyyoudh, M.K. Idrissi, S. Bennani (2020),¡§A New Approach of 
Integrating Serious Games in Intelligent Tutoring Systems. In: 
Serrhini M., Silva C., Aljahdali S. (eds) Innovation in Information 
Systems and Technologies to Support Learning Research,¡¨ EMENA- 
ISTL 2019. Learning and Analytics in Intelligent Systems, vol 7. 
Springer, 2019, Cham.

[23] S. Ventura, R.M. Banos, C. Botella, Virtual and Augmented Reality: 
New Frontiers for Clinical Psychology, DOI: 
10.5772/intechopen.74344, 2018.

[24] D.B. Douglas, D. Venets, C. Wilke, D. Gibson, L. Liotta, E. Petricoin, 
B. Beck, R.t Douglas,Diagnostic Radiology, DOI: 
10.5772/intechopen.74317, 2018.


